GH-40343: [C++] Move S3FileSystem to the registry (#41559)
apache/arrow: cpp/src/arrow/CMakeLists.txt

    foreach(ARROW_FILESYSTEM_TARGET ${ARROW_FILESYSTEM_TARGETS})
      target_link_libraries(${ARROW_FILESYSTEM_TARGET} PRIVATE ${AWSSDK_LINK_LIBRARIES})
    endforeach()

    if(ARROW_S3_MODULE)
      if(NOT ARROW_BUILD_SHARED)

>         message(FATAL_ERROR "ARROW_S3_MODULE without shared libarrow is not supported")

Reviewer: I find it super helpful when these messages let me copy and paste the option I need to pass to my CMake line instead of leaving me to figure out the flag myself

```suggestion
        message(FATAL_ERROR "ARROW_S3_MODULE without -DARROW_BUILD_SHARED=ON is not supported")
```

      endif()

      add_library(arrow_s3fs MODULE filesystem/s3fs_module.cc filesystem/s3fs.cc)
      target_link_libraries(arrow_s3fs PRIVATE ${AWSSDK_LINK_LIBRARIES} arrow_shared)
      set_source_files_properties(filesystem/s3fs.cc filesystem/s3fs_module.cc
                                  PROPERTIES SKIP_PRECOMPILE_HEADERS ON

>                                              SKIP_UNITY_BUILD_INCLUSION ON)

Reviewer: Do we remove the linking of the main arrow library against `AWSSDK_LINK_LIBRARIES` when `ARROW_S3_MODULE` is ON?

Author: We don't want to require the main arrow library to load the module. After the module can reproduce the full functionality of the S3FileSystem (S3ProxyOptions, for example) we can deprecate building s3 in the main library. That's not in scope for now, though

Author: > Did you had any idea on how to make the module expose the missing functionality too?

The filesystem module supports only construction of filesystems from URI strings (and thereafter we have access only to methods on the FileSystem base interface) so a brief enumeration of functionality missing relative to [pyarrow.fs.S3FileSystem](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/python/generated/pyarrow.fs.S3FileSystem.html) is
- constructing the filesystem with `proxy_options` 
- retrieving the AWS region a filesystem is connected to
- providing a retry_strategy to use when communicating with S3

It is *possible* to support all of these through URI strings alone, with some caveats:
- encoding proxy options in the `s3://` URI scheme
  - since it already has a [URI representation](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/12cdaaafb7a5ba39db81ba6d7e565b8e7a24117e/cpp/src/arrow/filesystem/s3fs.h#L53) that can be could be added as a single URI parameter like `s3://u:p@mybucket/foo/bar?proxy_options=http%3A//proxy_u%3Aproxy_p@proxy_host%3A999`
  - alternatively independent parameters could be added for `proxy_scheme`, `proxy_username`, etc
- AWS region is a URI parameter, so if we need to retrieve the region from a `FileSystem` we can convert it to a URI and read that parameter.
  - Region is resolved when the S3FileSystem is constructed, so it won't always be a copy of the region parameter in the original URI
  - Python has not bound [FileSystem::MakeUri](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/12cdaaafb7a5ba39db81ba6d7e565b8e7a24117e/cpp/src/arrow/filesystem/filesystem.h#L203) yet, but after it does access to the s3 region could be written like
    ```
    def get_s3_region(fs: FileSystem) -> str|None:
        if fs.type_name != "s3":
            return None
    
        from urllib.parse import urlparse, parse_qs
        params = parse_qs(urlparse(fs.to_uri()).query)
        return params["region"][0]
    ```
- `S3RetryStrategy` is currently available in C++ as a [fully user-extensible interface](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/12cdaaafb7a5ba39db81ba6d7e565b8e7a24117e/cpp/src/arrow/filesystem/s3fs.h#L72), which is of course not specifiable in a URI parameter. However in python at least this is only exposed as the choice between standard or default strategies and a [maximum number of retries](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/12cdaaafb7a5ba39db81ba6d7e565b8e7a24117e/python/pyarrow/_s3fs.pyx#L120). This more limited enumeration of retry strategies *can* be specified in a parameter, like `s3://u:p@mybucket/foo/bar?retry_strategy=standard/3`
  - Full configuration of the retry strategy interface seems like a feature which might be little used but a survey on the ML would be a good idea. If no significant use cases arise, there can be a deprecation cycle for public S3RetryStrategy

Once the above changes are made, the full functionality of `pyarrow.fs.S3FileSystem` can be recovered using just `libarrow_s3fs`. At that point, the option to build `libarrow` directly linked to the AWS SDK will be redundant and can be removed.

Author: > but I have some missing symbols

I don't know why that would be; [LoadFileSystemFactories](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/12cdaaafb7a5ba39db81ba6d7e565b8e7a24117e/cpp/src/arrow/filesystem/filesystem.cc#L846) loads symbols [locally](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/12cdaaafb7a5ba39db81ba6d7e565b8e7a24117e/cpp/src/arrow/util/io_util.cc#L2237) but the only symbols in libarrow_s3fs would be
- `arrow_filesystem_get_registry`
- symbols from the AWS libs
- symbols from libarrow

... none of which I'd expect to be needed by subsequently loaded shared objects. What symbols are missing? If the AWS libs are "subsequently loaded" then I guess LoadFileSystemFactories will need to load globally as in your python snippet

Author: Of course, another way to handle extended features of particular `FileSystem`s is to add extra functions to its module. For example, let's say that reading the resolved S3 region from a URI parameter as I described above did not seem natural. Instead, we could add to s3fs_module.cc
```c++
extern "C" {
ARROW_FORCE_EXPORT char* arrow_filesystem_get_s3_region(const void* fs);
}
```
... then in python that function could be retrieved with `CDLL.__getattr__`.

I recommend avoiding this extra-C-functions approach if possible since it introduces a de-facto ABI that would be a well hidden sharp edge in the library. For resolving s3 region this could be as simple as "the caller is responsible for freeing the returned string if it's not null". However if we consider the more complex example of fully user programmable retry strategy, extra-C-functions would involve
- negotiating the lifetime (both allocation/deallocation and construction/destruction) of retry strategy objects
- documenting the retry strategy interface as ABI stable so that no developers modify it (which would break an older libarrow_s3fs loaded by newer libarrow)
- probably asserting that the major version of libarrow_${any}fs matches the major version of libarrow which is loading it
- possibly also rewriting the retry strategy interface as a bundle of function pointers as we do with other ABI objects

Author: @raulcd 

After this merges, I will open a draft PR filling out the missing points of S3 support I described above:

- add proxy parameters to the S3 URL format. Proxy parameters will be namespaced like `proxy.username`
- expose MakeUri in python and use it to extract S3 region
- add a retry strategy parameter to the S3 URL format
- deprecate the retry strategy interface

I think having a concrete patch to discuss will help focus discussion here and on the ML
